P2079 proposed changes (#23)
LeeHowes/CPP: paper_framework_sources/p2079_system_execution_context.md

---
title: "System execution context"
document: P2079R4
date: 2024-03-17
audience: SG1, LEWG

> author:

Reviewer: You should add yourself here of course.

toc: false
---

> # Abtract

Reviewer: Amazing nobody else noticed that...

It has been broadly accepted that we need some sort of standard scheduler.

As part of [@P3109], `system_context` was voted as a must-have for the initial release of senders/receivers.
It provides a convenient and scalable way of spawning concurrent work for the users of senders/receivers.

As noted in [@P2079R1], an earlier revision of this paper, the `static_thread_pool` included in later revisions of [@P0443] had many shortcomings.
This was removed from [@P2300] based on that and other input.

One of the biggest problems with local thread pools is that they lead to thread oversubscription.
This introduces a performance problem for complex systems that are composed from many independent parts.

This revision updates [@P2079R1] to match the structure of [@P2300].
It aims to provide a simple, flexible, standard execution context that should be used as the basis for examples but should also scale for practical use cases.
It is a minimal design, with few constraints, and as such should be efficient to implement on top of something like a static thread pool, but also on top of system thread pools where fixing the number of threads diverges from efficient implementation goals.

> Unlike in earlier versions of this paper, we do not provide support for waiting on groups of tasks, delegating that to the separate `async_scope` design in [@P2519], because that is not functionality specific to a system context.

Author: done

 * Forward progress delegation: we must be able to implement a blocking operation that ensures forward progress of a complex parallel algorithm without special cases.

An implementation of `system_context` *should* allow link-time or compile-time replacement of the implementation such that the context may be replaced with an implementation that compiles and runs in a single-threaded process or that can be replaced with an appropriately configured system thread pool by an end-user.

Some key concerns of this design are:
* Extensibility: being able to extend the design to work with new additions to the senders/receivers framework.
* Replaceability: allowing users to replace the default behavior provided by `system_context`.
* Shareability: being able to share this system context across all binaries in the same process.
* Lifetime: as `system_context` is a global resource, we need to pay attention to the lifetime of this resource.
* Performance: as we envision this to be used in many cases to spawn concurrent work, performance considerations are important.

# Design
## system_context

> The `system_context` creates a view on some underlying execution context supporting *parallel forward progress*, with at least one thread.

Author: I mean that it can be the main thread as well (considering the other paper we are planning). Fixed.

   If there is outstanding work at the point of destruction, `std::terminate` will be called.
 - The `system_context` must outlive schedulers obtained from it.
   If there are outstanding schedulers at destruction time, this is undefined behavior.

>  - The lifetime of a `system_context` must end prior to the end of `main()`.

Reviewer: Do you want to continue down this path, or take the approach of using an implicit context whose lifetime is guaranteed to end at end of main? The feedback last time we discussed it was leaning in that direction.

custom_drive_operation(ctx);
```

Neither of the two variants are very portable.
The first variant requires applications that don't care about drive-ability to call `drive`, while the second variant requires custom pluming to tie the main thread with the system scheduler.

> We do not wish to solve this problem in this paper.

Author: removed

> We envision a new paper that adds support for a *main scheduler* similar to the *system scheduler*.

Author: removing the line above, I don't think this duplicates any previous lines.

The main scheduler, for hosted implementations would be typically different than the system scheduler.
On the other hand, on freestanding implementations, the main scheduler and system scheduler can share the same underlying implementation, and both of them can execute work on the main thread; in this mode, the main scheduler is required to be driven, so that system scheduler can execute work.

We do have people volunteering to work on the main scheduler paper, but keeping the two papers separately increases the chances of making progress in this area.

## Freestanding implementations

This paper payed attention to freestanding implementations, but doesn't make any wording proposals for them.
We express a strong desire for the system scheduler to work on freestanding implementations, but leave the details to a different paper.

> In this paper, we keep the details of system context to be implementation-defined, allowing it to be better specified later.

Author: removed

However, this is a question we should answer.

> ## Making system_context implementation-defined and replaceability

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Making system_context implementation-defined and replaceable
```

To achieve this we see options:

>  1. Link-time replaceability. This could be achieved using weak symbols, or by chosing a runtime library to pull in using build options.

Author: sounds good.

## ABI for system scheduler

A proper implementation of the system scheduler that meets all the goals expressed in the paper needs to be divided into two parts: "host" and "backend".
The host part implements the API defined in this paper and calls the backend for the actual implementation.
The backend provides the actual implementation of the system context (e.g., use Grand Central Dispatch or Windows Thread Pool).

As we need to switch between different backend, we need a "stable" ABI between these two parts.

While the authors believe that standardizing an ABI would be beneficial to the users (i.e., anyone an replace the backend), there is a concern about the feasibility of incorporating such an ABI in the standard.

The authors would like to obtain feedback from the implementers before advancing a proposal for standardizing the ABI.

## Shareability

One of the motivations of this paper is to stop the proliferation of local thread pools, which can lead to thread oversubscription.
If multiple binaries are used in the same process, we don't want each binary to have its own implementation of system context.
Instead, we would want to share the same underlying implementation.

> The recommendation of this paper is to leave the details of shareability to be implementation-defined.

Author: I'm trying to say that we don't specify in any way how the goal of shareability needs to be achieved. We just express the intent that we have shareability.

(Implementers can completely ignore us and don't plug this into a system-wide scheduler).

We should decide how best to achieve it within the standard.
Assuming we delegate customisation to the platform implementor, what wording would be appropriate for the specification, if any?

## Extensibility

The `std::execution` framework is expected to grow over time.

> We may need to add time-based scheduling, async I/O, priority-based scheduling, etc.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We expect to add time-based scheduling, async I/O, priority-based scheduling, and other for now unforeseen functionality.
```

This implies moving across binary boundaries, over some defined API (which should be extensible).
A common approach for this is to have COM-like objects.
However, the problem with that approach is that it requires memory allocation, and memory allocation is a costly operation.
This becomes problematic if we aim to encourage programmers to use the system context for spawning work in a concurrent system.

While there are some costs associated with implementing all the goals stated here, we want the implementation of the system context to be as efficient as possible.
For example, a good implementation should avoid memory allocation for the common case in which the default implementation is utilized for a platform.

This paper cannot recommend the specific implementation techniques that should be used to maximize performance; these are considered Quality of Implementation (QOI) details.

## Lifetime

Underneath the `system_context`, there is a singleton of some sort. We need to specify the lifetime of this object and everything that derives from it.

It makes sense to mandate that the lifetime of `system_context` underlying object should encompass the lifetime of `main()`.

> Using the `system_context` objects after the end of `main()` constitutes undefined behavior.

Reviewer: Should it be constructed only when main starts too? I believe that discussions suggests that at some point. The reasoning being that if you launch async work there is a risk of it depending on as-yet-unconstructed objects. IF the expectation is that nothing will run until the start of main, users will get consistent behaviour WRT construction order.

What happens at the end of main? Do we define destruction/blocking behaviour at that point?

A few key points of the implementation:
* The implementation is divided into two parts: "host" and "backend". The host part implements the API defined in this paper and calls the backend for the actual implementation. The backend provides the actual implementation of the system context.
* Allows link-time replaceability for `system_scheduler` (link time). Provides examples on doing this.
* Defines a simple C API between the host and backend parts. This way, one can easily extend this interface when new features need to be added to `system_context`.
* Uses preallocated storage on the host side, so that the default implementation doesn't need to allocate memory on the heap when adding new work to `system_scheduler`.
* Guarantees a lifetime of at least the duration of `main()`.
* As the default implementation is created outside of the host part, it can be shared between multiple binaries in the same process.
* IN PROGRESS: Provides an example on implementing the `drive()` behavior by replacing the default implementation.
* TODO: Use OS scheduler for implementation.

## Addressing received feedback

### Allow for system context to borrow threads

> Early feedback on the paper from Sean Parent suggested a need for the system context to carry no threads of its own and to take over the main thread.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Early feedback on the paper from Sean Parent suggested a need for the system context to support a configuration where it carries no threads of its own and takes over the main thread.
```

This wording is a bit repetitive given the wording at the end of 5.1 in R3, though I appreciate that condensing the feedback makes sense. Maybe it is worth simply removing the feedback related notes elsewhere?

In addition, we encourage implementations to allow the replaceability of the system context implementation.
This means that users should be allowed to write their own system context implementations that depend on OS facilities.

### Priorities and elastic pools

Feedback from Sean Parent:
> There is so much in that proposal that is not specified. What requirements are placed on the system scheduler? Most system schedulers support priorities and are elastic (i.e., blocking in the system thread pool will spin up additional threads to some limit).

The lack of details in the specification is intentional, allowing implementers to make the best compromises for each platform.
As different platforms have different needs, constraints, and optimization goals, the authors believe that it is in the best interest of the users to leave some of these details as Quality of Implementation (QOI) details.

# Questions to ask LEWG

## Do we want to standardize the "replaceability" aspect of `system_context` (as opposed to leaving this to be implementation defined)?

Proposed answer: NO.
We want to allow vendors the flexibility of choosing the best implementation.

> At the same time, the authors of this paper are willing to contribute to creating an informal basis for implementing replaceability in a common way among major vendors.

Reviewer: We should treat an implementation that does not do this as poor QOI, especially an implementor locking us in to never being able to do that.

Reviewer: I agree this would be the best approach. I was nervous about trying to define it the right way in this paper, like you a fear the delay.

## Do we want to add explicit support for `drive()` functionality in `system_context` (as opposed to letting this be implementation-defined)?

Proposed answer: NO.

> We would prefer this to be implementation-defined.

Reviewer: I would word this more strongly. It isn't so much that it should be implementation-defined, it's that for the standard context in all likelihood it makes no sense. It only makes sense as functionality for some thread-limited situation, where the context will run thread on a single application event loop, and those hooks are all very implementation-defined.

Reviewer: Some uses of system_context are going to have to use the main_context if the system really only has a single thread. So replacing system with main is still going to be necessary. At that point I'm not sure I see the value in main being queryable, rather than an implementation. Obviously, I missed the nuance of the discussion.

Should we simply update the wording here to say it is going to be a separate paper, and doesn't affect the core definition here.

### Implementation-defined may make things less portable

Some feedback gathered during discussions on this paper suggested that having many aspects of the paper to be implementation-defined would reduce the portability of the system context.

While it is true that people that would want to replace the system scheduler will have a harder time doing so, this will not affect the users of the system scheduler.
They would still be able to the use system context and system scheduler without knowing the implementation details of those.

We have a precedence in the C++ standard for this approach with the global allocator.

# Questions to ask LEWG/SG1/vendors

## What type of replaceability we want?

Do we want link-time replaceability or run-time replaceability?

## Do we want to standardize an ABI for system scheduler (as opposed to leaving this to be implementation defined)?

Proposed answer: NO.
We want to allow vendors the flexibility of choosing the best implementation.

> At the same time, the authors of this paper are willing to contribute to creating an informal basis for implementing replaceability in a common way among major vendors.

Author: changed the default, as we discussed. Changed the wording accordingly, and added Pros/Cons.

## Do we want to allow system scheduler to be used before start of `main()` ?

Proposed answer: NO.

> We believe that this would create more problems that it actually solves.

Author: agree, let's leave that for later :)

## Do we want to standardize an ABI for system scheduler (as opposed to leaving this to be implementation defined)?

Proposed answer: YES.

To allow users to easily change on the scheduler, they need to know how to replace the system scheduler backend.
The best way to do that is if we standardize the interface that the system scheduler has.

Tradeoffs:
* Pro: allow users to replace the default implementation.
* Pro: allow users to react faster to new technologies (without needing to wait for a new C++ release cycle).
  * I.e., similar to adopting io_uring, which got heavy adoption in a short amount of time
* Pro: increased portability
* Con: slightly larger interface needed to be standardized, and this is not something common for the C++ standard.
* Con: May allow vendors less freedom on implementing best interfaces for the targeted platforms.

> * Con: May decrease the consensus of the paper.

Reviewer 2: I would remove that completely because from my perspective we should not decide for the committee if something increases or decreases consensus. Otherwise, it looks like a "hint" for decreasing consensus (that we are proposing something bad)
```suggestion

```
